---
layout: page
title:  "Fund"
permalink: /fund/
---

### Towards a charitable hedge fund

**Problem:** Well, there's a lot of problems with finance, isn't there? Here's one angle, quite possibly a naive one, but indulge the thought for the moment: We understand that a business sustains itself by generating revenue, which comes from providing a certain service or product. On the other hand, a non-profit organization must by definition run on something other than profit, and for the most part these are donations from wealthy individuals. 

In practice, you already know of major institutional players that are both non-profit, but also run on large endowment funds, namely, private universities in the USA. There are also large private foundations that run on a similar principle: large donated sums are reinvested, and the revenue generated by the investments are used toward charitable purposes. 

At the same time, as investments funds tell us, you don't have to be extremely wealthy to start investing to see small returns. The question is, at what point do we have *enough* money, such that the surplus can be used towards helping others?

There are two other problems that we'd like to include along the way; they already have solutions and will be discussed below: socially-responsible investment and effective altruism. 

**Solution:**

The first thing is to acknowledge that there are already players in this space. The idea here is to bring together these solutions in a single product, coming at it from three fronts:

1. Non-profits relying on charitable donations is not sustainable. A lot of work goes into fundraising to generate consistent cash flow for so-called *expendable* funds. What we should think about instead is generating enough cash flow for *endowment* funds, large enough that the revenue generated by the investments sustain the activities at such non-profits.

	This seems to imply that one needs to be wealthy enough to make such a large donation. There should be a solution that democratizes this process, so that one may develop a portfolio that perhaps channels some funds into a larger endowment, while others into direct giving. Check out these guys over [here](https://smartergiving.org), doing some pretty rad stuff.

2. There is the question of what should be invested in, which falls under the banner of [socially-responsible investing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Socially_responsible_investing). The idea is simply to differentiate between companies that have positive and negative social impact, so that not only the return, but the investment itself is identified as a moral choice.

3. Having generated the return on investment, where should one invest in? Of course, a diversified giving portfolio might be in order. Now to maximize impact, there should be a high emphasis on the ideas of [effective altruism](https://www.effectivealtruism.org). After all, we are trying to be mathematical about our approach.

Of course, this is a slightly more ambitious project than the database, since it requires a lot more organization and money. Nonetheless, comments and suggestions welcome!